.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"  C Cross Referencing & Documenting tool - Version 1.5g
.\"
.\"  Manual page for cxref-cpp
.\"
.\"  Written by Andrew M. Bishop
.\"
.\"  This file Copyright 1996,1997,2004 Andrew M. Bishop
.\"  It may be distributed under the GNU Public License, version 2, or
.\"  any higher version.  See section COPYING of the GNU Public license
.\"  for conditions under which this file may be redistributed.
.\"
.TH cxref-cpp 1 "May 9, 2004"
.SH NAME
cxref-cpp - A modified C preprocessor to use with cxref.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cxref-cpp
.I ...

.SH DESCRIPTION

To improve the output that is available for the source code for
cross-referencing a modified version of the GNU CPP v2.7.2 is supplied (named
cxref-cpp).

This modified C preprocessor allows for a finer control over some features of
the preprocessing that are not important for a compiler.  In a standard
preprocessor, the preprocessor directives are intended for use only by the
preprocessor, so passing the information through is not important.

With cxref-cpp, there are some features that are different to the standard GNU
CPP:

.IP
Compared to gcc versions earlier than version 2.8.0 there is an extra option
that will output the #include lines from the source file.  In version 2.8.0 and
later this option is present.
.IP
Comments trailing a #include or a #define are not preserved by all versions of
gcc even if the -C option is used.  This is not important while compiling, but
is useful for documenting.
.IP
The cxref-cpp program will take on the personality of the installed version of
gcc so that the gcc header files can be parsed.  This means that it includes the
same default include directory paths and macro definitions.  The file that
contains these definitions is called cxref-cpp.defines and is installed by the
cxref-cpp-configure program or specified by the -cxref-cpp-defines command line
option.
.LP

.SH OPTIONS

The same as for gcc, apart from '-cxref-cpp-defines' described above.

.SH SEE ALSO

cxref(1), cxref-cpp-configure(1), gcc(1)
