.\" $Header$
.\"
.\"  C Cross Referencing & Documenting tool - Version 1.4
.\"
.\"  Manual page for cxref-cpp
.\"
.\"  Written by Andrew M. Bishop
.\"
.\"  This file Copyright 1996,1997 Andrew M. Bishop
.\"  It may be distributed under the GNU Public License, version 2, or
.\"  any higher version.  See section COPYING of the GNU Public license
.\"  for conditions under which this file may be redistributed.
.\"
.TH cxref-cpp 1 "April 27, 1997"
.SH NAME
cxref-cpp - A modified C preprocessor to use with cxref.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cxref-cpp
.I ...

.SH DESCRIPTION

To improve the output that is available a modified version of the GNU CPP V2.7.2
is supplied (named cxref-cpp).

This modified C preprocessor allows for a finer control over some features of
the preprocessing that are not important for a compiler.  In a standard
preprocessor, the preprocessor directives are intended for use only by the
preprocessor, so passing the information through is not important.

With cxref-cpp, there are two features that are different to the standard GNU
CPP:

.IP
The #include directives from the file are output in the same way as the #defines
are output.  An extra flag has been added to cpp to do this, '-dI', it works in
the same way as the existing '-dD' flag for #defines.
.IP
Comments trailing a #include or a #define are dropped with GNU CPP even if -C is
used. This is not important while compiling, but is useful for documenting.
.LP

.SH OPTIONS

The same as for gcc, apart from '-dI' described above.

.SH SEE ALSO

cxref(1), gcc(1)
