.TH cxref-query 1 "July 5, 1997"
.SH NAME
cxref-query - A program to query the cross reference database from cxref.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B  cxref-query
.I  [name \ [ \ ... \ name]]
.BI [\-O dirname ]
.BI [\-N basename ]
.B  [\-xref[\-all][\-file][\-func][\-var][\-type]]

.SH DESCRIPTION
A very simple program to query the cross-reference database that is created by
the cxref program. This is intended to be an example of the information that is
in the database and how to use it rather than a fully featured tool.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP 
.BR name
Names of objects to query.
The names that it looks up are the names of:
Files,
Variables,
Functions,
Typedefs

If there are no names on the command line then the program
enters interactive mode and prompts for names until an end of
file (^D) is seen.
.TP
.BR \-Odirname
Use dirname as the input directory
.TP
.BR \-Nbasename
Use basename.* as the input filenames
.TP
.BR \-xref
Produce cross referencing information (see below).
 -all    All cross references.
 -file   Cross references for files.
 -func   Cross references for functions.
 -var    Cross references for variables.
 -type   Cross references for types.

.LP
The output depends on the -xref options but basically gives what is seen in the
section of the document for the named object.

.SH SEE ALSO

cxref(1)

.SH BUGS
If you wish to submit bug reports or other comments about the program then email
the author amb@gedanken.demon.co.uk and put cxref in the subject line.

.SH AUTHOR
The cxref-query program is copyright Andrew M. Bishop 1995,96,97.
