\input amigatexinfo
\input texinfo

@c
@c $Id: FlexCat_english.texinfo 73 2007-01-01 02:48:17Z tactica $
@c

@c **** TODO ****
@c
@c - Fix FIXMEs.
@c - Complete the index
@c - Check all styles for consistency. Can't avoid the feeling that they
@c   are all mixed up at the moment...
@c 
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c
@c %**start of header
@setfilename FlexCat_english
@settitle Documentation for FlexCat 2.6.7
@setchapternewpage off
@iftex
@parskip=0.75em
@end iftex
@c %**end of header

@titlepage
@title{FlexCat}
@subtitle{The flexible catalog generator}
@subtitle{}
@subtitle{Version 2.6.7}
@author Jochen Wiedmann and Marcin Orlowski
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@tex
@halign{@hfil#&#@hfil@cr
       As of 2.6.3, FlexCat is developed by:@cr
@cr
       & Ondrej Zima@cr
       & amiandrew@@volny.cz@cr
@ct
       Releases 2.5 - 2.6.2 were developed by:@cr
@cr
       & Stefan Kost@cr
       & ensonic@@sonicpulse.de@cr
@cr
       Releases 1.8 - 2.4 were developed by:@cr
@cr
       & Marcin Orlowski@cr
       & ul. Radomska 38@cr
       & 71-002 Szczecin@cr
       & Poland@cr
@cr
       & carlos@@amiga.com.pl@cr
@cr
       Originally created by:@cr
@cr
       & Jochen Wiedmann@cr
       & Am Eisteich 9@cr
       & 72555 Metzingen@cr
       % Deutschland
}
@end tex

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this manual
and the program FlexCat.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file by TeX and print the results,
provided the printed document carries a copying permission notice identical to
this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this paragraph not being
relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

The author gives @strong{absolutely no} warranty that the program described
in this documentation and the results produced by it are correct. The
author cannot be held responsible for @strong{any} damage resulting from
the use of this software.
@end titlepage

@iftex
@headings double
@end iftex

@ifinfo
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Top
@top Documentation for FlexCat 2.6.7
This file describes the usage of FlexCat 2.6.7, a program that generates
catalogs and the source to handle them. FlexCat works in a similar fashion
to @code{CatComp} and @code{KitCat}, but differs in that it generates any
sources you want. This is done by using the so called @dfn{Source descriptions},
a set of templates that tell how the code is to be generated. They can be
edited and hence adapted to any programming language and individual needs
(hopefully!).

@menu
General

* Disclaimer::            Copyrights, (NO) warranty
* Overview::              What is FlexCat?
* Installation::          How can I get it working?

Using FlexCat

* Program start::         Calling FlexCat from the CLI
* Preferences::           Changing the default behaviour
* Catalog description::   Catalog description files (@key{.cd} files)
* Catalog translation::   Catalog translation files (@key{.ct} files)
* Source description::    Source description (@key{.sd} files)
* Using FlexCat source::  Using FlexCat source in your own programs

Other

* Future::                The future of FlexCat
* Support::               Where to look for updates
* History::               History of development
* Credits::               What I always wanted to say@dots{}
* Index::                 Where can you find what you are looking for

@end menu
@end ifinfo

@ifinfo
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Disclaimer
@chapter Copyright and other legal stuff
@cindex Copyright
@cindex Distribution
@cindex Permissions
@cindex Prohibitions
@cindex Author
@cindex Adress
@cindex Internet
@cindex Mail
FlexCat is Copyright @copyright{} 1993-1999 Jochen Wiedmann and Marcin Orlowski

@example
            Jochen Wiedmann
            Am Eisteich 9
            72555 Metzingen
            Germany


            Releases 1.8 - 2.4 were developed by

            Marcin Orlowski
            ul. Radomska 38
            71-002 Szczecin
            Poland

            carlos@@amiga.com.pl


            Releases 2.5 - 2.6.2 were developed by

            Stefan Kost
            ensonic@@sonicpulse.de


            As of 2.6.3, FlexCat is maintained by

            Ondrew Zima
            amiandrew@@volny.cz

@end example

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this manual
and the program FlexCat.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file by TeX and print the results,
provided the printed document carries a copying permission notice identical to
this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this paragraph not being
relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

The author gives @strong{absolutely no} warranty that the program described
in this documentation and the results produced by it are correct. The
author cannot be held responsible for @strong{any} damage resulting from
the use of this software.
@end ifinfo


@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Overview
@chapter Overview
@cindex Overview
Since Workbench 2.1, AmigaOS offers a rather pleasant system for using
programs in different languages: @code{locale.library}. This library made
@dfn{localization} easy on the Amiga.

The idea is simple: you simply write your program using your native language
(English in most cases) in the same manner as you used to do before
localization was available, except that static strings are replaced by
certain function calls. Another function call enables the user to select
another language when the program starts by loading an external file:
the so called @code{catalog}, from which the strings are loaded instead
of using the predefined strings.

Catalogs are independent from the program - all you need to do to add
another language is create a new catalog file, and this is always possible
without changing the program.

But there's additional work for the programmer: he/she needs to create the
catalogs, the predefined strings and some source to handle them all, i.e.
the functions we mentioned above. There you go: FlexCat is designed to make
this for you in a straighforward manner, without sacrificing any flexibility
when you write your source. Let us give you an example to make this more
clear.

Suppose that we want to write @file{HelloLocalWorld.c}. Our final program
will look like this:

@example
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <HelloLocalWorld_Cat.h>  /*  You @strong{must} include this! */

    void main(int argc, char *argv[])
    @{
      printf("%s\\n", msgHello);
    @}
@end example

@noindent
Note that this is very similar to the well known @file{HelloWorld.c}, except
for replacing the string "Hello, world!" with a @code{msgHello} constant.

These constants and the related strings are defined in a so called
@ref{Catalog description} file. You always start by creating a file
named @file{HelloLocalWorld.cd}, which could look like this:

@example
    ;   Comments are allowed, of course! Each line beginning with a
    ;   semicolon is assumed to be a comment
    ;
    ;   Language used by the built-in strings.
    #language english
    ;
    ;   The catalog version, used for a call to Locale/OpenCatalog().
    ;   This is different to Exec/OpenLibrary(): 0 means any catalog
    ;   version is accepted, but other numbers shall match exactly!
    #version 0
    ;
    ;   This defines a string and the ID referring to it.
    ;   Here, number 4 means that this string shall not be shorter
    ;   than 4 characters.
    msgHello (/4/)
    Hello, world!
@end example

By using FlexCat you create another two files from the catalog description:
the include file @file{HelloLocalWorld_Cat.h} defines the constants, whereas
@file{HelloLocalWorld_Cat.c} contains an array of strings and some
init functions.

You don't need to know what they do, just use them! You don't need to know
anything about @file{locale.library}, either.

However, you might be interested into knowing how these files look, and
most important, you might want to modify them. This is the difference
between FlexCat and other catalog generators: with FlexCat, you are not
limited to a certain format here.

Instead, FlexCat uses external template files, the so called
@ref{Source description} files. This makes it possible, for example,
to use catalogs with AmigaDOS 2.0, where locale.library is not
available. Using the source descriptions distributed with FlexCat,
you can create the source files with the following commands:

@example
    @samp{FlexCat  HelloLocalWorld.cd  HelloLocalWorld_Cat.c=C_c.sd}
    @samp{FlexCat  HelloLocalWorld.cd  HelloLocalWorld_Cat.h=C_h.sd}
@end example

When your program is ready, use FlexCat again to create the
@ref{Catalog translation} files, one for each language you would like to
support with them. For example, let's create a catalog translation for German:

@example
    @samp{FlexCat  HelloLocalWorld.cd  NEWCTFILE  Deutsch.ct}
@end example

@noindent
This file would now look as follow:

@example
    ## version
    ## language
    ## codeset 0
    ;   Comments ar allowed, of course! Each line beginning with a
    ;   semicolon is assumed to be a comment
    ;
    ;   Language used by the built-in strings:
    ;
    ;   The catalog version, used for a call to Locale/OpenCatalog().
    ;   This is different to Exec/OpenLibrary(): 0 means any catalog
    ;   version is accepted, but other numbers shall match exactly!
    ;
    ;   This defines a string and the ID referring to it.
    ;   Here, number 4 means that this string shall not be shorter
    ;   than 4 characters.
    msgHello

    ; Hello, world!
@end example

@noindent
As you can see, this looks much like typical catalog description files.
FlexCat includes the comments from the catalog description, even when
this is meaningless: note the comment on the string length, which doesn't
appear here as this information must be in the catalog description only.
All you have to do now is fill in the information on the version (a typical
version string like @samp{$VER: Deutsch.catalog 1.2 (06.03.03)} is expected),
the language of the catalog translation (here @samp{Deutsch} for German),
the codeset (which should usually be 0; see Locale/OpenCatalog() for
details) and of course the strings themselves. FlexCat includes the
original strings as comments, so you always know what to fill in.

Ultimately you create the catalogs with a command like

@example
    @samp{FlexCat  HelloLocalWorld.cd  Deutsch.ct  CATALOG  Deutsch.catalog}
@end example

@noindent
Note that you don't need the program itself or the source files created
with FlexCat for the catalogs! You can create new catalogs at any time.
It is usually a good idea to supply a @file{FlexCat.cd} file in your
software distributions for users to be able to create their own catalogs.

What if you change the program later? Well, you simply edit the catalog
description and use FlexCat to update the catalog translations:

@example
    @samp{FlexCat  HelloLocalWorld.cd  Deutsch.ct  NEWCTFILE  Deutsch.ct}
@end example

@noindent
Now all you have to do is to enter any new strings you may need.

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Installation
@chapter Installation
@cindex Installation
@cindex Requirements
Since FlexCat is written in pure Ansi-C (except for localization),
a simple recompile is all you should need to get it running on any Amiga
and hopefully on other machines, too. In the latter case however,
localization of FlexCat itself is not available.

This holds true also for the programs created: FlexCat is compiled using 
itself. All distributed source descriptions should create programs that
will run on any Amiga, and even any machine; for the latter however, you
must ensure that the LocaleBase variable is @samp{NULL}. Localization is
only possible as of Workbench 2.1 because @code{locale.library} is not
available in older releases.

That said, it is not impossible to offer localization even when
@code{locale.library} is unavailable: see the source description files
@file{C_c_V20.sd} and @file{C_h_V20.sd} for an example on how to use
@code{iffparse.library} when @code{locale.library} is not available.
This makes localization possible in Workbench 2.0.

Installing FlexCat is a pretty simple job: just copy the program to a
directory in your search path and select a place for the source descriptions
you need (the @file{xx_yy.sd} files, where @file{xx} is the programming
language). You probably want to set the environment variables @var{FLEXCAT.PREFS}
or @var{FLEXCAT_SDDIR}. See also @ref{Program start}.

On AmigaOS, if you want to use FlexCat in a language other than English,
you need to copy the respective catalog file, too. For instance, if you
speak German, copy @file{Catalogs/Deutsch/FlexCat.catalog} to
@file{Locale:Catalogs/Deutsch/} or @file{PROGDIR:Catalogs/Deutsch/}, where
@file{PROGDIR:} is the directory where FlexCat is installed. See also
@ref{Using FlexCat source}.

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Program start
@chapter Calling FlexCat from the CLI
@cindex CLI
@cindex Workbench
@cindex Shell
FlexCat is a CLI only program. The template is
@example

FlexCat CDFILE/A,CTFILE,CATALOG/K,NEWCTFILE/K,SOURCES/M,
        WARNCTGAPS/S,NOOPTIM/S,FILL/S,FLUSH/S,NOBEEP/S,
        QUIET/S,NOLANGTOLOWER/S,NOBUFFEREDIO/S,MODIFIED/S,
        COPYMSGNEW/S,OLDMSGNEW/K,AUTODATE/S

@end example
@noindent

Please note that in order to keep FlexCat portable, the argument parsing is
not quite standard. Most notably, the only keywords you can (and must) specify
are CATALOG and NEWCTFILE (those of type "/K"). Others should be ommited,
since they might end up being misused as arguments. This might change in
a future release.

As of 1.9, FlexCat implements a simple preferences mechanism which allows
you to change the default behaviour - see @ref{Preferences}.

And now, let's look at the meaning of those parameters:

@table @strong
@cindex CDFILE
@item CDFILE
Name of the catalog description file to be read. This is always needed.

Please note that the basename of the source description is taken from
this file, which means that case is significant. @xref{Source description}.

@cindex CTFILE
@item CTFILE
Name of a catalog translation file to be read. This is required to
create catalogs or to update old translations using NEWCTFILE: FlexCat
reads both the catalog description file and the old translation, and then
creates a new catalog translation file containing the old strings and
possibly some empty lines for the new strings appearing in the catalog
description that were not available in the old translation.

@cindex CATALOG
@item CATALOG
Name of a catalog file to be created. This requires both a catalog
description file and a translation.

@cindex NEWCTFILE
@item NEWCTFILE
The new catalog translation file to be created. FlexCat reads strings
from CTFILE (if provided), and strings missing in the catalog translation
are inserted as empty lines together with a new string marker as comment,
usually "***NEW***". If CTFILE is ommited, the new catalog translation
will only contain empty strings, assuming that the user is about to write
a new translation from scratch; in this case, markers aren't used.

@cindex SOURCES
@item SOURCES
Source files to be created. These should be specified in the form
@samp{SOURCE=TEMPLATE}, where @file{SOURCE} is the file to be created and
@samp{TEMPLATE} is the name of a source description file that is going
to be scanned.

If the specified source description file cannot be found, FlexCat will try
to open a file with the same name in @file{PROGDIR:lib}, i.e. the @file{lib}
subdirectory in the directory where FlexCat lives. You can override this
default with the @var{FLEXCAT_SDDIR} environment variable. For example,

@example
    @samp{FlexCat  FlexCat.cd  FlexCat_Cat.c=Templates/C_c_V20.sd}
@end example

@noindent
would first look for @file{Templates/C_c_V20.sd} in the current
directory; if it cannot be found and no variable @var{FLEXCAT_SDDIR}
exists, FlexCat will resort to @file{PROGDIR:lib/Templates/C_c_V20.sd}.
Should @var{FLEXCAT_SDDIR} actually exist and point to e.g. @samp{Work:Flexcat},
FlexCat would try with @file{Work:FlexCat/Templates/C_c_V20.sd}.

@cindex WARNCTGAPS
@item WARNCTGAPS
Usually FlexCat doesn't warn about string identifiers missing in the
catalog translation. This option enables these warnings.

@cindex NOOPTIM
@item NOOPTIM
If a translated string remains unchanged with respect to the original,
FlexCat assumes that there's no need to write it to the catalog file as
it will be available in its original form. However, if for any reason
those strings should still be written to the catalog, use this switch.

@cindex FILL
@item FILL
Very useful for translators.

While working on a large translation where many strings are still
empty, you may want to check how the already translated strings will
look like, but compiling the catalog at this stage will probably
give you a half working program, since a lot of strings are empty.
In the worst scenario, the program you are translating can even crash!

This switch will force FlexCat to fill the catalog with all the missing
strings taken from the description file, thus allowing you to check the
strings already translated. Note, however, that the final translation
should NOT be created using this switch!

@cindex FLUSH
@item FLUSH
If you are still making changes to your translation and checking how
does it look at the same time, most likely you will have to keep using
the @file{AVAIL FLUSH} command to expunge the old catalog from memory,
because AmigaOS treats catalogs just like libraries, fonts, device
handlers, etc.: they remain loaded until memory gets too low or a
memory flush is forced.

If you specify this switch while creating the catalog, FlexCat will
automatically flush all unused resources from memory just like
@file{AVAIL FLUSH} would. Bear in mind however, that this will only
help if the program you are translating is not currently running,
otherwise chances are that the catalog is locked and cannot be expunged
from memory.

Example:

@example
    @samp{FlexCat  Test.cd  Test.ct  CATALOG  Test.catalo g FLUSH}
@end example

@cindex NOBEEP
@item NOBEEP
Since version 1.9, FlexCat will call DisplayBeep() to notice you about
any problem. This is very useful when you call FlexCat from an environment
without an standard output (e.g. with an AmigaDOS script, using a button
in DOpus, etc). While FlexCat is smart enough to beep only once even if
20 warnings are reported in a row, you may still want to disable this
feature completely by using this switch.

@cindex NOLANGTOLOWER
@item NOLANGTOLOWER
Normally FlexCat will switch the #language entry argument taken from the
translation to lowercase using utility.library, which in turn calls
locale.library if it is available. However, it has been reported that the
conversion tables available with some languages (e.g. Czech) are buggy,
and lead to an incorrect conversion. As a workaround, this switch
provides the means to avoid this procedure to happen at all, but then
you will have to keep the #language name lowercase manually.

If your locale has this problem, you're highly encouraged to report it
to the AmigaOS maintainers, or to someone that may pass the report on
to them. Bear in mind that other tools will also produce wrong results
if this is the case, possibly with a far more undesirable effect.

@cindex NOBUFFEREDIO
@item NOBUFFEREDIO
Buffered I/O gives better performance for most applications doing intensive
input/output, and this is also the case with FlexCat especially on
systems where polling devices are involved, like (E)IDE drives, though
even users of DMA based systems (SCSI) will benefit. FlexCat uses two
2kB buffers, but if for some reason you want do disable this feature
completely, just use this switch.

@cindex MODIFIED
@item MODIFIED
Makes FlexCat to compile a catalog ONLY if the description or translation
file have changed since the last time: if the catalog file datestamp is
newer than any of the description or translation, FlexCat will simply
quit without doing anything.

This option comes in handy when using FlexCat in a makefile, possibly
compiling several catalogs at once when changes are done to the sources.

Example:

@example
    @samp{FlexCat File.cd File.ct CATALOG File.catalog MODIFIED}
@end example

@cindex QUIET
@item QUIET
Prevents FlexCat from giving warning messages, i.e. only errors will be
reported. Example:

@example
    @samp{FlexCat File.cd File.ct QUIET}
@end example

@cindex COPYMSGNEW
@item COPYMSGNEW
When updating an old translation using an updated description file,
FlexCat will mark all newly added strings with a @var{***NEW***} string
(see the @ref{Preferences} chapter for how to customize this string),
which is very useful to quickly find later the new things added since
the last update. Unfortunately, previous versions of FlexCat (pre 2.2)
didn't copy those markers over from the old translation, which forced
translators to either update only complete translations where no markers
were left, or to somehow copy them by themselves.

Since 2.2 however, FlexCat pays attention to these markers and will copy
them to the new translation file if this switch is used. Example:

@example
    @samp{FlexCat New.cd Old.ct NEWCTFILE Updated.ct COPYMSGNEW}
@end example

By default, COPYMSGNEW searches for the @var{***NEW***} string and treats
it as the new string marker. If you were using a different string, you
will need to specify it using the OLDMSGNEW keyword explained below.

@cindex OLDMSGNEW
@item OLDMSGNEW
This parameter only makes sense when combined with COPYMSGNEW. By default,
COPYMSGNEW searches for the @var{***NEW***} string and treats it as the
new string marker, copying it to the updated translation; however, if you
were using a different string, you need to specify it using OLDMSGNEW,
otherwise FlexCat won't find it. Example:

@example
    @samp{FlexCat New.cd Old.ct NEWCTFILE Updated.ct COPYMSGNEW OLDMSGNEW=**Neu**}
@end example

@cindex NOSPACE
@item NOSPACE
*FIXME* To be documented...

@cindex AUTODATE
@item AUTODATE
*FIXME* to be verified...

This switch was formerly known as NOAUTODATE, and since it was disabled
by default, FlexCat would always ignore the date in the translation
and use the current date when compiling a catalog, which in turn could
break havoc for people tracking changes done to a large number of
translations.

This is not the case anymore - if you really want to use the current date,
use this switch, otherwise the date specified in the translation will be
respected.

@end table


For more examples on how to use FlexCat, see the @ref{Overview}.

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Preferences
@chapter Changing the default behaviour
@cindex Preferences
@cindex flexcat.prefs
@cindex NEW_MSG
@cindex SDDIR
As of 1.9, FlexCat implements a simple preferences mechanism - by
using the @var{FLEXCAT.PREFS} environment variable, you can change
the default behaviour.

The @var{FLEXCAT.PREFS} variable is parsed using the ReadArgs() call
in dos.library, so all switches should be typed in one line with a space
as separator. Here's the template:

@example
SDDIR/K,NEW_MSG/K,WARNCTGAPS/S,NOOPTIM/S,FILL/S,FLUSH/S,NOBEEP/S,QUIET/S,
COPYMSGNEW/S,OLDMSGNEW/K,AUTODATE/S
@end example

@strong{NEW_MSG} can be used to customize the text that FlexCat uses to
mark new strings appearing while updating an old translation using a
new description. The default string is @var{***NEW***}.

Note concerning SDDIR: when creating source files, FlexCat checks the
following places (in this order):

@enumerate
@item the current directory
@item the directory set in the preferences
@item the directory set by the @var{FLEXCAT_SDDIR} variable
@item the @file{PROGDIR:lib} directory
@end enumerate

Therefore, using both the variable and @var{FLEXCAT_SDDIR} you can use
two custom descriptors directories simultaneously.

For detailed information about the other keywords ands switches, read the
@ref{Program start} chapter.

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Catalog description
@chapter Catalog description files
@cindex Catalog description
@cindex .cd
A catalog description file contains four kinds of lines:

@table @strong
@item Comments
Any line where a semicolon (';') exists in the first column is assumed
to be a comment, and therefore ignored.

@item Command lines
Lines beginning with a hash character ('#') are taken as commands. Commands
are case insensitive, here's the list of commands supported by FlexCat:

@table @code
@item #language <string>
Specifies the default language used by the program, which should match
the language used in the catalog description file. Default is
@code{#language english}.

@item #version <number>
Specifies the version number of catalogs that will be opened and used
by the program. Note that this number must match @strong{exactly} and not
differ from the version number opened by @cite{Exec/OpenLibrary()}.
Number 0 is special: it means that any catalog version will be accepted.
It is also the default value. See @file{Locale/OpenCatalog} for further
information on catalog languages and versions.

@item #lengthbytes <number>
Instructs FlexCat to put the given number of bytes before a string containing
its length. The length is the number of bytes in the string without length
bytes plus a trailing @samp{NUL} byte (catalog files and therefore catalog
strings will have a trailing @samp{NUL} byte - this is not always true for
the default strings, depending on the source description file).

@samp{<number>} must be between 0 and @math{sizeof(long)=4}. Default is @samp{#lengthbytes 0}.

@item #basename <string>
Sets the basename of the @ref{Source description}, overriding the basename
specified with CDFILE at the command line. @xref{Program start}.
@end table

@item Description lines
They declare a string. They look like @samp{IDSTR (ID/MinLen/MaxLen)} where

@itemize @minus
@item @samp{IDSTR} is an identifier using the characters a-z, A-Z and 0-9
@item @samp{ID} is an unique number, whereas @samp{MinLen} and @samp{MaxLen}
are the minimum and maximum lengths acceptable for the translated string,
respectively. All three are optional, in which case @cite{(//)} shall be
there; in this case, FlexCat chooses a number and assumes that there are
no restrictions on the string length. As a general rule, if you don't need
the ID's when creating the description file, don't use them!
@end itemize

@item String lines
@cindex Control characters
@cindex Ascii-Code
They contain the string itself and nothing else. Certain control characters
can be used here, introduced with a backslash:

@itemize @minus
@item @samp{\\b} for the backspace character (ASCII 8)
@item @samp{\\c} for the Control Sequence Introducer (ASCII 155)
@item @samp{\\e} for Escape (ASCII 27)
@item @samp{\\f} for the formfeed character (ASCII 12)
@item @samp{\\g} for the displaybeep character (ASCII 7)
@item @samp{\\n} for the linefeed (newline) character (ASCII 10)
@item @samp{\\r} for the carriage return (ASCII 13)
@item @samp{\\t} for TAB (ASCII 9)
@item @samp{\\v} for the vertical TAB (ASCII 11)
@item @samp{\\)} for the closing parenthesis which is possibly needed
as part of a @samp{(..)} sequence, see @ref{Source description}
@item @samp{\\\\} for the backslash itself
@item @samp{\\xHH} to get the character corresponding to ASCII code @samp{HH},
where @samp{HH} is an hex code
@item @samp{\\OOO} for the character corresponding to ASCII code @samp{OOO},
where @samp{OOO} is an octal code
@end itemize

Lastly, a single backslash at the end of a line forces a concatenation with
the following line, making it possible to use very long strings without
sacrificing readability. FlexCat makes no assumptions on string length.
@end table

A string is therefore declared with an identifier and a line containing
the string itself. For example,

@example
    msgHello (/4/)
    Hello, this is English!\\n
@end example

@noindent
@cindex FlexCat.cd
The ID is missing here, so FlexCat chooses a suitable number. Number 4
tells FlexCat that the string must not have less than four characters.
See the @file{FlexCat.cd} file for some real examples.

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Catalog translation
@chapter Catalog translation files
@cindex Catalog translation
@cindex .ct
Catalog translation files are very similar to catalog descriptions, but
they use different commands and contain no information on IDs and lengths,
as this data is taken from the catalog description file. All strings
declared in the description should be present in the translation, and
no other strings should appear.

These are the commands allowed in catalog translations:

@table @code
@item ## version <string>
Contains the catalog version as an AmigaDOS version string. Example:

@example
    ## version $VER: FlexCat.catalog 8.3 (06.03.2003)
@end example

The version number of this catalog is 8, therefore the catalog description
file shall be either version 0 or 8 for the translation to be usable.

You can replace the date part (06.03.2003 in this example) with the
special keyword @samp{$TODAY}; when the catalog is compiled, @samp{$TODAY}
will be automatically replaced by the current date (note however that ONLY
the first instance of @samp{$TODAY} in the version string will be replaced).
Example:

@example
    ## version $VER: FlexCat.catalog 8.3 ($TODAY)
@end example

Note that versions 2.6 - 2.6.6 of FlexCat used to completely ignore the
date in the translation and use the current date. This is no longer the
case with 2.6.7 onwards, unless you use the AUTODATE switch.

In addition, FlexCat automatically converts a "program.ct" instance in
the version string to "program.catalog" in the compiled catalog.

@c FIXME: The following line *is* an outrageous hack to prevent
@c        CVS from doing its thing, but will do until I find a
@c        better solution.
@c FIXME: The template doesn't match the description! You suck!

@item ## rcsid @dmn{$}Date@dmn{$} @dmn{$}Revision@dmn{$} @dmn{$}Id@dmn{$}
This can be used in conjunction with a revision control system instead
of @code{## version}. @samp{Date} becomes the date in the format @samp{yy/mm/dd},
while @samp{time} is the time (ignored) and @samp{rev} is the revision.

@item ## name <name>
This one is supported mainly for compatibility with CatComp. It replaces
the @samp{name} argument in the @code{## rcsid} command.

@item ## language <string>
The language used in the translation, which of course should be different
to the one used in the description. The @samp{## language} and @samp{## version}
commands must always be present in a catalog translation.

@item ## codeset <number>
Should be 0 unless the translation is targetted at V50, in which case
it should be set to the code set used in the translation, e.g. 5 for
ISO-8859-5. Defaults to 0.

@item ## chunk <ID> <string>
Adds a chunk ID to the catalog consisting on the given string.
Usually one uses this to add comments to the catalog, as in

@example
    ## chunk AUTH German catalog translation by Jochen Wiedmann
    ## chunk ANNO Generated by FlexCat
@end example

@end table

@cindex german.ct
The string given as example in the @ref{Catalog description} chapter
could turn into this in the catalog translation:

@example
    msgHello
    Hallo, dies ist deutsch!\\n
@end example

@noindent
See @file{german.ct} for an actual catalog translation.

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Source description
@chapter Source description files
@cindex Source description
@cindex .sd
This is the special part of FlexCat. If you have read this manual from
the beginning, surely you haven't yet seen anything that CatComp, KitCat
and others don't offer already.

The source created should be easy to use without losing flexibility.
Any programming language should be supportable, and so should any special
requirements you may have. This may seem like a contradiction, but FlexCat's
proposition to this are the @dfn{source description files} containing a
template of the source to be created. These files are just as editable as
catalog description and catalog translation files are; therefore, FlexCat
can potentially create the code required to fit your particular needs.

Source description files are searched for certain symbols, which then will
be replaced with certain values. Possible symbols are the backslash
characters we have already seen, as well as sequences beginning with
a @samp{%} character, which surely rings a bell for C programmers.

@table @samp
@item %b
Basename of the catalog description - see @ref{Program start}.

@item %v
Version number of the catalog description. Careful here - do not mix
this up with the version used in the catalog translation.

@item %l
Language used in the catalog description file. Note that this is inserted
as a string - see @samp{%s} below.

@item %n
Number of strings in the catalog description.

@item %%
The @samp{%} character itself.
@end table

However, the most important sequences are listed below. These sequences
represent the catalog strings in different ways. Lines containing one or
more of these symbols are repeated for any string.

@table @samp

@item %i
Identifier taken from the catalog description.

@item %nd
@itemx %nx
@itemx %nc
String ID in decimal, hexadecimal and octal characters, respectively.
The @samp{n} number tells FlexCat how many characters the ID should use
(the string will be padded with zeros at the left).

You may omit @samp{n} if you want - in this case, the ID will just take
the number of characters it needs.

@item %e
Number of this string. The counter begins at 0.

@item %s
The string itself. How it will be inserted depends on the programming
language, and can be controlled using the commands @samp{##stringtype}
and @samp{##shortstrings} (see below).

@item %na
The string ID. The difference between @samp{%na} and e.g. @samp{%nx} is that
@samp{%na} produces string IDs @strong{parted} to single bytes. For
example, @samp{%2a} in a source descriptor will produce @samp{\\x00\\0x20}.

You may omit @samp{n}, in which case the ID will take exactly 4 bytes.

@item %nt
Length of the string. Please note that the result value is always @strong{even}.

@item %z
Should be used together with @samp{%nt}. Since @samp{%nt} always returns
an even value, having a descriptor line like

@example 
    static const char Block[] =
    @{
         "%2a" "%2t" %s "%z"
    @};
@end example

might lead to problems especially while parsing such a table, since @samp{%2t}
might be even whereas the length of the real string @samp{%s} could be odd!
This would mean that while parsing you would read or skip one byte too much,
and you know the consequences of that, don't you?

To avoid such problems, @samp{%z} was introduced: FlexCat will replace it
with as many bytes (@samp{\\x00}) are needed to make the string length even.
For instance, if a string is 3 bytes long, @samp{%nt} will return @samp{4}
and @samp{%z} will add one @samp{\\x00}

@item %(...)
Inserts the text between the parenthesis for any string except the last one.
This is probably needed in arrays, where the array entries have to be separated
with commas, but the last entry must not be followed by a comma; in this
case, you could simply use @samp{%(,)}.

Note that no substitution of @samp{%} sequences happens within the parenthesis.
Backslash sequences, however, are still allowed.

@end table

The control sequences @samp{%l} and @samp{%s} create strings, but how strings
look in the end will depend on the language used in the program - this is why
the source description files allow command lines similar to those used in
catalog translation files. These must begin at the first column of the
line, with one command per line.

Possible commands are:

@table @code
@item ##shortstrings
Splits long strings over separate lines. This is probably not always possible
or even not properly implemented into FlexCat, and thus the default is to
create a single, probably very long string.

@item ##stringtype <type>
Tells FlexCat how strings should look like. Possible types are:

@table @strong
@item None
No additional characters are created. An image of the string is inserted
and nothing else. No output of binary characters (the backslash sequences)
is possible.

@item C
Creates strings according to the @ref{C} language syntax: they will be preceded
and followed by the double quote character (@samp{"}). Strings are split
using the @samp{\\} sequence at the end of the line and @samp{"} at the
beginning of the new line (the backslash is needed in macros). Binary
characters are inserted using @samp{\\OOO}.

@item @ref{Oberon}
It's like string type C, except for the trailing backslash at the end of the
line. This string type is also recommended for Modula-2.

@item @ref{Assembler}
Strings are created using @samp{dc.b}. Readable ASCII characters are preceded
and followed by the single quote character (@samp{'}), whereas binary
characters are inserted as @samp{$XX}.

@item E
Strings are preceded and followed by the single quote character (@samp{'}).
A @samp{+} (plus) character concatenates strings which are split over
separate lines. Binary characters are inserted like in C.
@end table
@end table

Let's look now at an excerpt from the file @file{C_h.sd} creating an include
file for C.

@example
##stringtype C
##shortstrings

#ifndef %b_CAT_H    /*  Assure that this is read only once. */
#define %b_CAT_H


/*  Get other include files     */
#include <exec/types.h>
#include <libraries/locale.h>


/*  Prototypes  */
extern void Open%bCatalog(struct Locale *, STRPTR);
extern void Close%bCatalog(void);
extern STRPTR Get%bString(LONG);

/*  Definitions of the identifiers and their ID's           */
/*  This line will be repeated for any string.              */
#define %i %d

#endif
@end example

For the search path used for source descriptions, see @ref{Program start}.

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Using FlexCat source
@chapter Including FlexCat source in your own programs
@cindex Using FlexCat source
@cindex FlexCat source
Of course this depends on what source is created and hence on the source
description. What we are talking here about are the source description
files distributed with FlexCat (see @ref{Source description}).

All source descriptions should allow using your program without
@code{locale.library}. However, a global variable called @samp{LocaleBase}
(@samp{_LocaleBase} for assembler) must be present and initialized with
NULL or with a call to @cite{Exec/OpenLibrary}. No localization is possible
in the former case except when using the source description @file{C_c_V20.sd}.
This allows localization on 2.0 by replacing calls to @code{locale.library}
with calls to @code{iffparse.library} (an @samp{IFFParseBase} variable has
to be present for this, and initialized like @samp{LocaleBase}). @xref{C}.
Programmers don't need to know these libraries except when creating their
own source description files.

There are three functions, and calling them is pretty simple:

@table @code
@item OpenCatalog (locale, language)
This function possibly opens a catalog. The @code{locale} argument is a
pointer to a Locale structure, whereas @code{language} is a string containing
the name of the language that should be opened. In most cases these should
both be @samp{NULL} or @samp{NIL} respectively, because the user defaults
are overriden otherwise. See @cite{Locale/OpenCatalog} for details.

Non object orientated languages (C, Assembler, Modula) usually call this
function @code{OpenXXXCatalog}, where XXX is the basename of the application:
this makes it possible to use different catalogs in the same program.

If the user has @samp{Deutsch} and then @samp{Français} selected as
preferred languages and the program's basename is @samp{XXX}, this will
look for the following files in sequence:

@example
    @file{PROGDIR:Catalogs/Deutsch/XXX.catalog}
    @file{LOCALE:Catalogs/Deutsch/XXX.catalog}
    @file{PROGDIR:Catalogs/Français/XXX.catalog}
    @file{LOCALE:Catalogs/Français/XXX.catalog}
@end example

where @file{PROGDIR:} is the program's current directory (the order of
@file{PROGDIR:} and @file{LOCALE:} can get changed in order to suppress the
typical @samp{Insert volume YYY} requester).

OpenCatalog is of type @code{void} (a procedure for Pascal programmers),
and therefore gives no result.

@item GetString (ID)
Gives a pointer to the string with the given ID from the catalog description.
Of course these strings are owned by @code{locale.library} and must not be
modified.

An example might be useful. Take the string from the catalog description
example, which was called @code{msgHello}. The source descriptions
declare a constant @samp{msgHello} representing the ID. This could be
printed in C using e.g.

@example
    printf("%s\\n", GetString(msgHello));
@end example

@item CloseCatalog (void)
This function frees the catalog (i.e. the RAM allocated for it) before
terminating the program. You can call this function at any time, even
before OpenCatalog is called.

@end table

@menu
* C::          FlexCat source in C programs
* C++::        FlexCat source in C++ programs
* Oberon::     FlexCat source in Oberon programs
* Modula-2::   FlexCat source in Modula-2 programs
* Assembler::  FlexCat source in Assembler programs
* E::          FlexCat source in E programs
* Appendix::   Multiple catalogs support
@end menu

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node C
@section FlexCat source in C programs
@cindex C
@cindex C_c_V20.sd
@cindex C_h.sd
@cindex C_c_V21.sd
@cindex AutoC_c.sd
@cindex AutoC_h.sd
@cindex CatComp_h.sd
@cindex Cat2h_c.sd
@cindex Cat2h_h.sd
C source consists on two parts: a @file{.c} file which should be simply
compiled and linked, and an include file which should be included from any
source part using catalog strings to define the IDs as macros.

C compilers like SAS/C, DICE and GCC allow automatic opening of libraries
and initialization of the catalogs; therefore, you don't need to call
neither @code{OpenCatalog} or @code{CloseCatalog}, as your compiler
does that for you already. Similarly, they call the @code{GetString}
functions for all catalog strings from within @code{OpenCatalog}, which
allows you to simply write @samp{msgHello} instead of @samp{GetString(msgHello)}.

If you define a preprocessor symbol @code{LOCALIZE_V20} for the compiler
(option @samp{-D LOCALIZE_V20} with GCC and DICE, or @samp{DEF LOCALIZE_V20}
with SAS/C), you get a program which can use catalogs under OS 2.0:
calls to @code{locale.library} will simply be replaced by calls to
@code{iffparse.library} instead. In this case however, your program will
need an option like @samp{LANGUAGE Deutsch}: a function @code{InitXXXCatalog}
(@samp{XXX} being the basename of the application) should be called if
this option is present, receiving the language name as parameter.
This option is ignored, of course, if @code{locale.library} is available.

Even OS 1.3 could be supported in this fashion, but then again it would
be pointless to do it at this day and age.

Bear in mind that you lose some functionality with this source description;
for example, you cannot supply a @code{Locale} structure to @code{OpenCatalog}.
However, 95% of applications won't miss anything, while others need to modify
the source description.

For a sample program using these source descriptions, see the @ref{Overview}.

@noindent
@samp{NOTES}

As of 1.9, the FlexCat distribution archive contains a @file{CatComp_h.sd}
source descriptor, which can be used with programs utilizing more than
one catalog at the same time. Give it a look to see how to update other
source descriptors.

There's also another new source descriptor contributed by Magnus Holmgren
<lear@@algonet.se>. The @file{Cat2h_c.sd} and @file{Cat2h_h.sd} files contain
source descriptors that generate code similar to the one generated by Cat2h
by Nico François (and also Cat2Inc by Magnus Holmgren ;) using a somewhat
different approach to string handling, which is both small and fast.

Rather than storing all strings in an array and scan that one each time
(like CatComp normally does; there are ways around that though), the first
two bytes of a string contain the ID. Then, the GetString() function,
which takes a string as argument, reads these two bytes into a long
word, and the string ID and default string are then known.

In addition, FlexCat 1.9+ is capable of generating that kind of output,
using the %a command. Actually, the files included use %2a, and thus only
two ID bytes per string are generated, like Cat2h does. This should be
enough for most applications. If you change the length, remember that the
GetString() function needs to be changed accordingly.

The generated header file defines all strings, and the source file contains
code to open/close the catalog (with autoinit code for SAS/C and DICE), and
a suitable GetString function.  A quick look at the generated code should
probably be enough to gather all the details.

The code does not currently support multiple catalogs, nor changes to the
version number and built-in language. This is easy to add though, for
example using %b for all names and references that need to be unique,
like Get%bString().

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node C++
@section FlexCat source in C++ programs
@cindex C++
@cindex C++_cc.sd
@cindex C++_h.sd
@cindex C++_CatalogF.cc
@cindex C++_CatalogF.h
Using FlexCat source in C++ programs is extremely comfortable: almost
everything is done by a special class implemented in the @file{C++_CatalogF.cc}
and @file{C++_CatalogF.h} files. All you have to do is rename these files
as @file{CatalogF.cc} and @file{CatalogF.h}, compile them and create and
compile two additional files using the source descriptions @file{C++_cc.sd}
and @file{C++_h.sd}; the former will create a file with the strings (which
must also be compiled, of course), whereas the latter will be included into
your own program. A C++ program which uses FlexCat source will look like this:

@example
    #include <iostream.h>
    extern "C"
    @{
    #include <clib/exec_protos.h>
    @}
    #include "CatalogF.h"
    #include "HelloLocalWorld_Cat.h"

    struct LocaleBase *LocaleBase = 0;

    int main()
    @{ //  You must open the library here, even if your compiler supports
      //  Auto-Opening: This will usually break if the locale.library
      //  is not present. This is not what we want here as we just use
      //  the builtin strings in that case.
      LocaleBase = (struct LocaleBase *) OpenLibrary("locale.library", 38);

      const CatalogF cat(0, 0, HelloLocalWorld_ARGS);

      cout >> cat.GetString(msgHelloLocalWorld);

      if (LocaleBase)
          CloseLibrary(LocaleBase);
    @}
@end example

A modified @file{libauto.a} for GCC is available which will even allow
you to remove the lines concerning the @code{LocaleBase} variable.

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Oberon
@section FlexCat source in Oberon programs
@cindex Oberon
@cindex Oberon_V38.sd
@cindex Oberon_V39.sd
@cindex AmigaOberon
@cindex Oberon-A
Several source descriptions are available:

@itemize @minus
@item @file{AmigaOberon.sd} is designed for the current version of the
@code{AmigaOberon} compiler

@item @file{Oberon_V39.sd} is for older versions

@item @file{Oberon_V38.sd} uses @file{Locale.mod} from Hartmut Goebel.

@item @file{Oberon-A.sd} is of course targetted at @code{Oberon-A}
@end itemize

The function prototypes are:

@example
    XXX.OpenCatalog(loc: Locale.LocalePtr; language : ARRAY OF CHAR);
    XXX.GetString(num: LONGINT): Exec.StrPtr;
    XXX.CloseCatalog();
@end example

where @samp{XXX} is the basename from the @ref{Source description}.

Finally, let's see a sample program using FlexCat source:

@example
    MODULE HelloLocalWorld;

    IMPORT  x:=HelloLocalWorld_Cat; Dos;

    BEGIN
      x.OpenCatalog(NIL, "");

      Dos.PrintF("%s\\n", x.GetString(x.msgHello));

      (* Catalog will be closed automatically       *)
      (* when program exits.                        *)
    END Anything;
@end example


@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Modula-2
@section Flexcat source in Modula-2 programs
@cindex Modula-2
@cindex Modula2Def.sd
@cindex Modula2Mod.sd
Modula-2 supports a module concept similar to Oberon, whereby function
names are always the same. Unlike Oberon, however, Modula-2 needs an
implementation and a definition module, that's why you have to create
two files using the source descriptions @file{Modula2Def.sd} and
@file{Modula2Mod.sd}. These are adapted for the M2Amiga compiler.
Note that you need the @file{OptLocaleL.def} file from version 4.3
of the M2Amiga compiler, too.

The function prototypes are:

@example
    PROCEDURE OpenCatalog(loc : ld.LocalePtr;
                          language : ARRAY OF CHAR);
    PROCEDURE CloseCatalog();
    PROCEDURE GetString(num : LONGINT) : ld.StrPtr;
@end example

where @samp{XXX} is the basename from the source description (see
@ref{Source description}).

Finally, let's see a sample program using FlexCat source:

@example
    MODULE HelloLocalWorld;

    IMPORT hl: HelloLocalWorldLocale,
           io: InOut;

    BEGIN
      hl.OpenCatalog(NIL, "");

      io.WriteString(hl.GetString(hl.msgHello)); io.WriteLn;

      hl.CloseCatalog;
    END HelloLocalWorld.
@end example

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Assembler
@section FlexCat source in Assembler programs
@cindex Assembler
@cindex AztecAs_asm.sd
@cindex AztecAs_i.sd
Assembler source is created for use with the Aztec Assembler. This should
not be very different to other assemblers, and you should be able to
implement your own source descriptions. The source consists on two parts:
an @file{.asm} file which should be simply assembled and linked, and an
@file{.i} include file which defines the string IDs and has to be included
by your program.

FlexCat's function names are slightly modified to allow using different
catalogs in a single file: they are @samp{OpenXXXCatalog}, @samp{CloseXXXCatalog}
and @samp{GetXXXString}, where @samp{XXX} is the basename from the source
description. The concept is taken from GadToolsBox and so far it has
proved good (see also @ref{Source description}).

As usual, the function result is given in d0 and the functions save registers
d2-d7 and a2-a7. OpenCatalog() expects its arguments in a0 (pointer to
Locale structure) and a1 (Pointer to language string), which should be NULL
in most cases. GetString() expects a pointer in a0. You should not care about
where it points to.

Finally, here's a sample program using FlexCat source:

@example
*   HelloLocalWorld.asm
        include "XXX.i" ; Opening this is a must. This
                        ; contains "xref OpenHelloLocalWorldCatalog", ...

        xref    _LVOOpenLibrary
        xref    _LVOCloseLibrary
        xref    _AbsExecBase

        dseg
LocNam: dc.b    "locale.library",0
        dc.l    _LocaleBase,4       ; Must be present under this name

        cseg

main:   move.l  #38,d0              ; Open locale.library
        lea     LocName,a1
        move.l  _AbsExecBase.a6
        jsr     _LVOOpenLibrary(a6)
*   NO exit, if OpenLibrary fails

        sub.l   a0,a0               ; Open catalog
        sub.l   a1,a1
        jsr     OpenHelloLocalWorldCatalog

        lea.l   msgHello,a0         ; Get pointer to string
        jsr     GetHelloLocalWorldString
        jsr     PrintD0             ; and print it

Ende:
        jsr     CloseHelloLocalWorldCatalog ; Close Catalog
        move.l  _LocaleBase,a1      ; Close locale.library
        move.l  a1,d0               ; this test is a must for 1.3
        beq     Ende1
        jsr     CloseLibrary
Ende1:
        rts
        end
@end example

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node E
@section FlexCat source in E programs
@cindex E
@cindex E21b.sd
@cindex E30b.sd
@c FIXME: The end of this paragraph could be worded better.
As of 3.0, E allows programs to be split over separate modules. The
following describes the usage of @file{E30b.sd}, which works with E 3.0b
and later. Please note that 3.0a had significant bugs, whereas previous
versions might use @file{E21b.sd} instead, which requires inserting the
created source into the own source manually.

@file{E30b.sd} creates a module called @file{Locale} which contains a
@code{cat} variable of type @samp{catalog_XXX}, where @samp{XXX} is the
basename from the source description (see @ref{Source description}).

A theorethical @file{HelloLocalWorld.e} might look like this:

@example
    MODULE '*Locale'
        -> Use this module

    DEF cat : PTR TO catalog_HelloLocalWorld
        -> This variable contains all the catalog strings and some
        -> methods. You must declare it in any module using
        -> Localization, but initialize it in the main module only.

    PROC main()

        localebase := OpenLibrary('locale.library', 0)
            -> Open locale.library; @strong{No} exit, if it cannot
            -> be opened: We use the builtin strings in that case.

        NEW cat.create()
        cat.open()
            -> As already mentioned, this is needed in the main
            -> module only.

        WriteF('\\s\\n', cat.msg_Hello_world.getstr())
            -> cat.msg_Hello_world one of the strings contained in
            -> cat. This string declares a method getstr() which
            -> reads the catalog and returns a pointer to the
            -> localized string.

        cat.close()
        IF localebase THEN CloseLibrary(localebase)
    ENDPROC
@end example

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Appendix
@section Multiple catalogs support

Most of currently available source descriptors cannot be used
for programs opening more than one catalog. This will probably
change in future releases, and corrected source descriptors will
be available as part of the FlexCat distribution archive.

For the time being, an example of such source descriptor file
is supplied: take a look at @file{CatComp_h.sd} for how should
the descriptor be defined to avoid multiple symbols, etc.

In short: use @samp{%b} as prefix, suffix or other part of any name
that is the vital part of your sources. If your table of strings is
named @samp{STRING}, replace it with @samp{%b_STRINGS} and you won't
get duplicated labels anymore.

@file{CatComp_h.sd} produces sources similar to those generated by
CatComp, and can be used by those who wish to use FlexCat but don't
want or simply can't afford to do significant changes to their sources.

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Future
@unnumbered Further development of FlexCat
@cindex Future
@cindex FlexCat
@cindex Contributions
In short, the future of FlexCat depends entirely on you! Marcin dropped
the development as the program fulfilled all his needs, and his TODO
list was mostly empty. Suggestions, tips, bug reports and constructive
criticisement are welcome, and we would like to include any new string
types you may want to contribute, since this is possible with only a
few minor changes.

New source descriptions and extensions to support additional programming
languages are especially welcome, as long as they have been proven good
by testing them with an existing program. See @ref{Support} for contact
info.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Support
@unnumbered FlexCat support site
@cindex Support

The @uref{http://sourceforge.net/projects/flexcat/,Flexcat homepage} is
the way to go to know about updates, file bug reports and post your
enhancement requests.

The current FlexCat maintainer is Ondrej Zima <amiandrew@@volny.cz>

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Credits
@unnumbered Credits
@cindex Credits

The original FlexCat author, @samp{Jochen Wiedmann}, would like to thank:

@table @samp
@item Albert Weinert
For KitCat, the predecessor of FlexCat which was so valuable to me even
if finally wasn't flexible enough, and for the Oberon source descriptions.

@item Reinhard Spisser and Sebastiano Vigna
For the Amiga version of texinfo. This documentation is written using it.

@item The Free Software Foundation
For the original version of texinfo and many other excellent software.

@item Matt Dillon
For DICE, and especially for DME.

@item Alessandro Galassi
For the original Italian catalog.

@item Lionel Vintenat
For the E source description and its documentation, the original French
catalog and the bug reports.

@item Antonio Joaquín Gómez González <u0868551@@oboe.etsiig.uniovi.es>
For the C++ source descripton, the original Spanish translation of this
manual, the original Spanish catalog and the very good hint on speeding
up the GetString() function.

@item Olaf Peters <op@@hb2.maus.de>
Gor the Modula-2 source description.

@item Russ Steffen <steffen@@uwstout.edu>
For the suggestion of the FLEXCAT_SDDIR variable.

@item Lauri Aalto <kilroy@@tolsun.oulu.fi>
For the original Finnish catalog.

@item Marcin Orlowski <carlos@@amiga.com.pl>
For the original Polish catalog and for maintaining the Polish locale
package.

@item Udo Schuermann <walrus@@wam.umd.edu>
For suggesting the WARNCTGAPS option and the ## chunk command.

@item Christian Hoj <cbh@@vision.auc.dk>
For the original Danish catalog.

@item The people of #AmigaGer
For answering many stupid questions and lots of fun, for example
stefanb (@samp{Stefan Becker}), PowerStat (@samp{Kai Hoffmann}),
ill (@samp{Markus Illenseer}), Quarvon (@samp{Jürgen Lang}),
ZZA (@samp{Bernhard Möllemann}), Tron (@samp{Mathias Scheler}),
mungo (@samp{Ignatios Souvlatzis}), jow (@samp{Jürgen Weinelt}) and
Stargazer (@samp{Petra Zeidler}).

@item Commodore
For the Amiga and Kickstart 2.0. Keep on developing it and I'll be an
Amiga user for the next 8 years too. ;-)
@end table


@samp{Marcin Orlowski}'s acknowledgements go to:

@table @samp

@item Jochen Wiedmann
For creating FlexCat in the first place.

@item Magnus Holmgren <lear@@algonet.se>
For the additional source descriptor Cat2h.

@item Members of the Amiga Translators' Organization <http://ato.vapor.com/ato/>
For creating additional translations and updating those already existing:

@itemize @minus
@item Serbian catalog file by Ljubomir Jankovic <lurch@@afrodita.rcub.bg.ac.yu>
@item Czech translation by Vit Sindlar <xsindl00@@stud.fee.vutbr.cz>
@item Svedish translation by Magnus Holmgren <lear@@algonet.se> and Hjalmar Wikholm <hjalle@@canit.se>
@item Finnish translation updated by Mika Lundell <c71829@@uwasa.fi>
@item Italian translation reworked by Luca Nora <ln546991@@silab.dsi.unimi.it> and Giovanni Addabbo <gaddabbo@@imar.net>
@item Slovenian translation by Damir Arh <damir.arh@@guest.arnes.si>
@item Dutch translation updated by Leon Woestenberg <leon@@stack.nl>
@end itemize

@item Christian Hattemer <chris@@heaven.riednet.wh.tu-darmstadt.de>
For the StormC source descriptors and for updating the German catalog.

@item Sven Steiniger <ss37@@irz301.inf.tu-dresden.de>
For the new source descriptor for E programmers (E32e.sd).
@end table

@iftex
@vfill@eject
@end iftex

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node History
@chapter History of development
@cindex History
@cindex Changes

The history of FlexCat development is logged in the @file{FlexCat.history}
file which is an integral part of the official distribution archive.

@headings off

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@contents

@bye
