\input texinfo
@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename grub.info
@settitle GRUB Manual
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi

@c Unify all our little indices for now.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp

@footnotestyle separate
@paragraphindent 3
@finalout

@dircategory Kernel
@direntry
* GRUB: (grub).                 The GRand Unified Bootloader
* grub-install: (grub)Invoking grub-install.    Install GRUB on your drive
* mbchk: (grub)Invoking mbchk.  Check for the format of a Multiboot kernel
@end direntry

@setchapternewpage off

@ifinfo
Copyright @copyright{} 1996 Erich Boleyn
Copyright @copyright{} 1999, 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries a copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@sp 10
@title The GRUB Manual
@subtitle The GRand Unified Bootloader, version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}.
@author Gordon Matzigkeit
@author OKUJI Yoshinori
@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1996 Erich Boleyn
Copyright @copyright{} 1999, 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage

@finalout
@headings double

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top GRUB

This is the documentation of GNU GRUB, the GRand Unified Bootloader,
a flexible and powerful boot loader program for @sc{pc}s.

This edition documents version @value{VERSION}.
@end ifnottex

@menu
Part I: The Tutorial Manual

* Overview::                    What exactly GRUB is and how to use it
* Naming convention::           Names of your drives in GRUB
* Installation::                Installing GRUB on your drive
* Booting::                     How to boot different operating systems
* Configuration::               Writing your own configuration file
* Network::                     Downloading OS images from a network
* Serial terminal::             Using GRUB via a serial line
* Security::                    Improving the security

Part II: The User Reference Manual

* Introduction::                Capturing the spirit of GRUB
* GRUB images::                 GRUB images
* Filesystem::                  Filesystem syntax and semantics
* Interface::                   The menu and the command-line
* Commands::                    The list of available builtin commands
* Troubleshooting::             Error messages produced by GRUB
* Invoking the grub shell::     How to use the grub shell
* Invoking grub-install::       How to use the GRUB installer
* Invoking mbchk::              How to use the Multiboot checker

Part III: The Programmer Reference Manual

* Hacking::                     Implementation details
* Memory map::                  The memory map of various components
* Embedded data::               Embedded variables in GRUB
* Filesystem interface::        The generic interface for the fs code
* Bootstrap tricks::            The bootstrap mechanism used in GRUB
* I/O ports detection::         INT 13H tracking technique
* Memory detection::            How to detect all installed @sc{ram}
* Low-level disk I/O::          INT 13H disk I/O interrupts
* MBR::                         The structure of Master Boot Record
* Partition table::             The format of partition table

Appendices and Indices

* FAQ::                         Frequently asked questions
* Obtaining and Building GRUB:: How to obtain and build GRUB
* Reporting bugs::              Where you should send a bug report
* Index::
@end menu

@iftex
@page
@unnumbered Part I: The Tutorial Manual
@end iftex

@include tutorial.texi

@iftex
@page
@unnumbered Part II: The User Reference Manual
@end iftex

@include user-ref.texi

@iftex
@page
@unnumbered Part III: The Programmer Reference Manual
@end iftex

@include prog-ref.texi

@iftex
@page
@unnumbered Appendices and Indices
@end iftex

@include appendices.texi

@contents
@bye
