
### Help message and manual page ##############################################

__END__

=head1 NAME

sfdc - Compile SFD files into someting useful

=head1 SYNOPSIS

sfdc [options] file1.sfd [file2.sfd ...]

  Options:
    --addvectors=TYPE       Add default functions
    --gateprefix=PREFIX     Prefix for gatestub functions
    --help -h               Show full help message and exit
    --libarg=LOCATION       Where to pass the libbase
    --libprefix=PREFIX      Prefix for library functions
    --man                   Show full manual page and exit
    --mode=MODE             What to do
    --output=FILE -o FILE   Where to store the output
    --quiet -q              Be quiet
    --target=TARGET         Specifies the machine target
    --version -v            Show version and exit

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 8


=item B<--addvectors>

This flag adds the standard library/device/BOOPSI functions to the
list of function entries to process. Possible values are B<none>,
B<library>, B<device> and B<boopsi>. The default is B<none>. Useful
when generating gate stub functions.


=item B<--gateprefix>

Sets a function name prefix for the gate stub functions when
generating gatestubs or gateproto files.


=item B<--help>

Show the full help message and exit.

    
=item B<--libarg>

Specifies where to place the library base argument when generating
gatestubs or gateproto and libproto files. Possible values are
B<none>, B<first> and B<last>. The default is B<none>.


=item B<--libprefix>

Sets a function name prefix for the local library functions when
generating gatestubs or libproto files.


=item B<--man>

Show the complete manual page and exit.


=item B<--mode>

Instructs F<sfdc> what to do. F<sfdc> can handle the
following arguments:

=over 4

=item B<clib>

Generate C prototypes to be placed in F<Include/clib/>.


=item B<dump>

Dumps all information gathered from the SFD file.


=item B<fd>

Generate an old-style FD file.

    
=item B<gateproto>

Generate a prototype header file for library gate stubs. Useful for
library and device developers.


=item B<gatestubs>

Generate library gate stubs. Useful for library and device developers.


=item B<libproto>

Generate a prototype header file for library functions. This is almost
like B<clib>, but for internal use by library and device developers.


=item B<lvo>

Generate an assembler LVO include file.


=item B<macros>

Generate a header file containing F<gcc> specific preprocessor macros,
similar to F<fd2inline>'s B<--new> switch. For AROS targets, it
generates a file suitable to be placed in the F<Include/defines/>
directory.

    
=item B<proto>

Generate header file to be placed in F<Include/proto/> that includes
the C prototypes as well as compiler-specific inlines or pragma files.


=item B<pragmas>

Generate a F<SAS/C>/F<LATTICE>/F<DICE> and F<Maxon C>/F<Storm
C>/F<Aztec C> pragma file.


=item B<stubs>

Generate C library stubs suitable to be compiled and archived into
F<libamiga.a>, F<libamigastubs.a> or
F<libI<E<lt>moduleE<gt>>.a>. Using the B<%f> escape sequence in the
B<--output> switch or a tool like F<splitasm.awk> strongly is
recommended.

=item B<verify>

Just loads and parses the SFD file. This is the default.

=back


=item B<--output> 

Specifies where the result will be stored. The following escape
sequencies are allowed in the file name. If the sequence B<%f> is
present in the name, a new file will be created for each function
processed.

=over 4

=item B<%b>

The library base variable name (C<DOSBase>, for example).

=item B<%f>

The current funcion name (C<Open>, for example).

=item B<%l>

The name of the library or device (F<dos.library>, for example).

=item B<%n>

The base name of the library or device (C<dos>, for example).

=back

If omitted, the result will be sent to the standard output instead of
a file.

=item B<--quiet>

Be quiet.


=item B<--target>

Specifies the target when generating macros etc. The target names
follow the GNU autoconf standard. Some possible values are listed
below. The default is B<m68k-unknown-amigaos>.

=over 4

=item B<i?86-pc-aros>, B<i?86-linux-aros>, B<ppc-aros> ...

AROS. Anything goes, as long as it ends in C<-aros>.


=item B<i?86be-pc-amithlon>, B<i?86be-amithlon>

Amithlon/big endian IA32.


=item B<m68k-unknown-amigaos>, B<m68k-amigaos>

Traditional AmigaOS/m68k.


=item B<powerpc-unknown-morphos>, B<ppc-morphos>

MorphOS/PowerPC.


=back



=item B<--version>

Prints the version and exits.


=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

F<sfdc> is an open source replacement for Amiga, Inc.'s F<sfd> tool,
distributed with B<NDK 3.9>. It is also an replacement for
F<fd2inline> from GeekGadgets and the MorphOS team, later improved to
death by Martin Blom. It's now a complete mess and needs a
replacement. SFD files and F<sfdc> might to be a good start.

For developers using F<gcc>, F<sfdc> aims to handle all your needs
when it comes to libraries, devices, datatypes, BOOPSI classes or
similar modules. F<sfdc> can also generate F<SAS/C>, F<DICE> and
F<Storm C> files for end users of such modules.

The basis for all work performed by F<sfdc> is the B<SFD> file, which
contains all required information about the module and the functions
provided. From this information, F<sfdc> can:

=over 4

=item *

Generate an old-style B<FD> file for futher processing with other tools.


=item *

Generate a B<C prototype file>, such as those normally found in the
F<Include/clib/> directory.


=item *

Generate F<gcc> B<inlines> (actually preprocessor macros) or
B<pragmas> for direct library function calls (without going via
library stubs).


=item *

Generate the F<Include/proto/> file, which includes the
F<Include/clib/> file and either the inlines or pragmas.


=item *

Generate an B<assembler LVO> file, which contains the library offset
of all functions in the library.


=item *

Generate B<C stubs>, which can be compiled and archived into a stub
library.


=item *

Generate library B<gateway stubs>, which can be used as part of your
module as glue between the module function table and your C functions.


=back


Additionally, F<sfdc> does all this for several Amiga-like operating
systems: traditional B<AmigaOS>, native B<Amithlon>, B<AROS> and
B<MorphOS>.

F<sfdc> uses F<autoconf> style identifies for the operating systems,
making it easy to generate the correct output. Just make sure
F<configure.in> contains the B<AC_CANONICAL_SYSTEM> command and use
B<@host@> in your F<Makefile.in>. Using F<autoconf> and F<sfdc>, it's
easy to make for example a library that can be compiled or
cross-compiiled for any of the mentioned architectures.


=head1 RETURN VALUE

Returns 0 on success and 10 on errors.


=head1 NOTES

Had I seen F<cvinclude.pl> before I started writing this program, I
might still have been using fd/clib files. Or maybe not.

=head1 AUTHOR

Martin Blom <martin@blom.org>

=head1 HISTORY

=item B<1.0 (2003-07-27)>

Initial release.


=item B<1.1 (2003-12-22)>

Added workaround for workbench.library (base name is "wb").
Added AmigaOS 4 support.
Added the --addvectors switch.


=item B<1.2 (2004-06-16)>

Generates files for mathieeedoub*, though probably broken. Well they
are the same as fd2inline generates at least.


=item B<1.2a (2004-06-20)>

Replace AROS_LP with AROS_LD. Because it is guaranteed to define the
function prototype. [verhaegs]

=item B<1.3 (2004-11-12)>

Correctly handle the argument C<type **arg>, where there is no
whitespace between the argument type and the argument name.

=item

Correctly handle the prototype C<void function (void)>, were there is
a whitespace between the function name and the parenthesis and "void"
is used to indicate no arguments.

=item

Replace C<-> with C<_> in base/library name.

=item

New special keyword for register specification (in addition to B<sysv>
and B<base>): B<autoreg>, which automatically allocates m68k registers
for the arguments.

=item

B<sysv> now works correctly with varargs functions. B<sysv> combined
with B<gatestubs> work for m68k and i386 only for now. For AROS
targets in B<macros>, the correct AROS macro is used to fetch the
function to be called.

=item

New B<--mode>: B<functable>. For proper code generation in AROS, make
sure gateprotos are included before you include the functable.

=item

B<proto> files now include F<Include/defines/> files when used in AROS.
